Multi-Candidate Reduction: Sentence Compression as a Tool for
Document Summarization Tasks∗
David Zajic1 , Bonnie J. Dorr1 , Jimmy Lin1 , Richard Schwartz2
1

University of Maryland
College Park, Maryland, USA
dmzajic@cs.umd.edu, bonnie@umiacs.umd.edu, jimmylin@umd.edu
2

BBN Technologies
9861 Broken Land Parkway
Columbia, MD 21046
schwartz@bbn.com

Abstract
This article examines the application of two single-document sentence compression techniques
to the problem of multi-document summarization—a “parse-and-trim” approach and a statistical noisy-channel approach. We introduce the Multi-Candidate Reduction (MCR) framework for
multi-document summarization, in which many compressed candidates are generated for each source
sentence. These candidates are then selected for inclusion in the final summary based on a combination of static and dynamic features. Evaluations demonstrate that sentence compression is a
valuable component of a larger multi-document summarization framework.
Keywords: headline generation, summarization, parse-and-trim, Hidden Markov Model
PACS: Artificial intelligence, 07.05.Mh; Computer science and technology, 89.20.Ff; Spoken languages, processing of, 43.71.Sy

1

Introduction

This article presents an application of two different single-document sentence compression methods
to the problem of multi-document summarization. The first, a “parse-and-trim” approach, has been
implemented in a system called Trimmer and its extended version called Topiary. The second, an
HMM-based approach, has been implemented in a system called HMM Hedge.
These systems share the basic premise that a textual summary can be constructed by selecting
a subset of words, in order, from the original text, with morphological variation allowed for some
word classes. Trimmer selects subsequences of words using a linguistically-motivated algorithm to
trim syntactic constituents from sentences until a desired length has been reached. In the context of
∗

Please cite as: David Zajic, Bonnie Dorr, Jimmy Lin, and Richard Schwartz. Multi-Candidate Reduction: Sentence
Compression as a Tool for Document Summarization Tasks. Information Processing and Management, 43(6):1549-1570,
2007. [DOI: 10.1016/j.ipm.2007.01.016] This is the pre-print version of a published article. Citations to and quotations
from this work should reference that publication. If you cite this work, please check that the published form contains
precisely the material to which you intend to refer. (Received 18 July 2006; revised 3 January 2007; accepted 8 January
2007) This document prepared August 31, 2007, and may have minor differences from the published version.

1

Documents

Sentence
Filtering

Sentences

Sentence
Compression
Candidates
Summary

Sentence
Selection

Task-Specific Features
(e.g., query)

Figure 1: The Multi-Candidate Reduction (MCR) framework.
very short single-document summarization, or headline generation, this approach is applied to the lead
sentence (the first non-trivial sentence) in order to produce a short headline tens of characters long.
HMM Hedge (Hidden Markov Model HEaDline GEnerator), on the other hand, is a statistical headline
generation system that finds the subsequence of words most likely to be a headline for a given story.
This approach is similar to techniques used in statistical machine translation in that the observed story
is treated as the garbled version of an unseen headline transmitted through a noisy channel. In their
original configurations, both Trimmer and HMM Hedge create sentence compressions that mimic the
style of Headlinese, a form of compressed English associated with newspaper headlines (Mårdh, 1980).
The goal of our work is to transition from a single-document summarization task with sentencelevel character-based length constraint to a multi-document summarization task with summary-level
word-based length constraint. In headline generation, summaries should fill as much of the available
space as possible, without going over the limit. Headlines that fall below the length limit miss the
opportunity to include additional information. Headlines that exceed the length limit must be truncated, resulting in ungrammatical sentences and loss of information. When the length constraint is
applied to a collection of sentences instead of a single sentence, concerns about individual sentence
length become less important. A short sentence does not result in wasted space and it is acceptable to
include a lengthy sentence as long as it includes important, non-redundant information.
To transition from single-document to multi-document summarization, we examined different combinations of possible sentence compressions to construct the best summary. A key innovation of this
work—tested for the first time in 2005 at the Document Understanding Conference (DUC-2005) (Zajic
et al., 2005b) and Multilingual Summarization Evaluation (MSE-2005) (Zajic et al., 2005a)—is the
use of multiple compressed candidates for sentences in the source documents. Sentence compression is
used for different purposes in single- and multi-document summarization tasks. In the first case, the
goal is to fit long sentences into the available space while preserving important information. In multidocument summarization, sentence compression is used to generate multiple candidates that capture
relevant, non-redundant information. Sentence selection algorithms can then be applied to determine
which compressed candidates provide the best combination of topic coverage and brevity.
We introduce a framework for extractive multi-document summarization called Multi-Candidate
Reduction (MCR), whose architecture is shown in Figure 1. Sentence compression techniques are employed in the intermediate stage of the processing pipeline to generate multiple compressed variants of
source sentences. A sentence selector then builds the final summary by choosing among these candidates, based on features propagated from the sentence compression method, features of the candidates

2

themselves, and features of the present summary state. Under this framework, our previously-developed
systems, Trimmer and HMM Hedge, are employed to generate the compressed candidates. The MCR
architecture also includes a filtering module that chooses the source sentences from which compressed
candidates are generated. This work does not examine the filtering process in detail, as we only employ
very simple approaches, e.g., retain first n sentences from each document.
Sentence compression supports extractive multi-document summarization by reducing the length
of summary candidates while preserving their relevant content, thus allowing space for the inclusion of
additional material. However, given the interaction of relevance and redundancy in a multi-sentence
summary, it is unlikely that a single algorithm or scoring metric can provide the “best” compression
of a sentence. This is the motivation for MCR, which provides several alternative candidates for each
source sentence. Subsequent processes can then select among many alternatives when constructing the
final summary.
This article is organized as follows: The next section relates our approach to other existing summarization systems. In Section 3, we describe Trimmer, a variant of Trimmer called Topiary, and HMM
Hedge. These systems implement two fundamentally different approaches to sentence compression.
Section 4 describes how these tools can be applied to a multi-document summarization task. Section 5
describes evaluations of our framework. Our systems have also been applied to several different types
of texts; some of these applications will be briefly covered in Section 6. Finally, we propose future work
in the area before concluding.

2

Related Work

We have developed a “parse-and-trim” approach to sentence compression, implemented in a system
called Trimmer (Dorr et al., 2003b). The system generates a headline for a news story by compressing
the lead (or main) topic sentence according to a linguistically-motivated algorithm that operates on
syntactic structures. Syntactic approaches to compression have been used in single-document summarization systems such as Cut-and-Paste (Jing and McKeown, 2000) and also in multi-document
summarization systems such as SC (Blair-Goldensohn et al., 2004) and CLASSY (Conroy et al., 2005;
Conroy et al., 2006). The SC system pre-processes input to remove appositives and relative clauses.
CLASSY uses an HMM sentence selection approach combined with a conservative sentence compression
method based on shallow parsing to detect lexical cues to trigger phrase eliminations. The approach
taken by Trimmer is most similar to that of Jing and McKeown (2000), in which algorithms for removing syntactic constituents from sentences are informed by analysis of human summarizers. Trimmer
differs from these systems in that multiple compressed candidates of each sentence are generated. The
potential of multiple alternative compressions has also been explored by Vanderwende et al. (2006).
Summaries may also contain lists of words or short phrases that denote important topics or concepts
in the document. In particular, extractive topic summaries consist of keywords or key phrases that
occur in the document. We have built Topiary, an extension to Trimmer, that constructs headlines
combining compressed sentences with topic terms. This approach is similar to the work of Euler (2002),
except that Euler uses topic lists to guide sentence selection and compression toward a query-specific
summary, whereas Topiary uses topics to augment the concept coverage of a generic summary. Our
system was demonstrated to be the top-performing single-document summarization system in the
DUC-2004 evaluation (Zajic et al., 2004).
In contrast to Topiary, which combines sentence compression with topic terms, others have constructed summaries directly from topic terms. For example, Bergler et al. (2003) choose noun phrases
that represent the most important entities as determined by noun phrase coreference chains. Wang et
al. (2005) propose a baseline system that constructs headlines from topic descriptors identified using
term frequency counts; this system was reported to outperform LexTrim, their Topiary-style system.
Zhou and Hovy (2003) construct fluent summaries from a topic list by finding phrase clusters early in
3

the text that contain important topic words found throughout the text.
The task of assigning topic terms to documents is related to text categorization, in which documents
are assigned to pre-defined categories. The categories can be labeled with topic terms, so that the
decision to put a document in a category is equivalent to assigning that category’s label to the document.
Assigning topic terms to documents by categorization permits the assignment of terms that do not occur
in the document. Lewis (1999) describes a probabilistic feature-based method for assigning Reuters
topics to news stories. Along these lines, OnTopicTM (Schwartz et al., 1997) uses an HMM to assign
topics to a document.
In addition to Trimmer, we have implemented HMM Hedge (Hidden Markov Model HEaDline
GEnerator), a statistical headline generation system that finds the most likely headline for a given story.
This approach is similar to techniques used in statistical machine translation in that the observed story
is treated as the garbled version of an unseen headline transmitted through a noisy channel. The noisychannel approach has been used for a wide range of Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications
including speech recognition (Bahl et al., 1983); machine translation (Brown et al., 1990); spelling
correction (Mays et al., 1990); language identification (Dunning, 1994); and part-of-speech tagging
(Cutting et al., 1992). Of those who have taken a noisy-channel approach to sentence compression
for text summarization Banko et al. (2000), Knight and Marcu (2000), Knight and Marcu (2002),
and Turner and Charniak (2005) have used the technique to find the most probable short string that
generated the observed full sentence.
Like other summarization systems based on the noisy-channel model, HMM Hedge treats the observed data (the story) as the result of unobserved data (headlines) that have been distorted by transmission through a noisy channel. The effect of the noisy channel is to add story words between the
headline words. Our approach differs from Knight and Marcu (2000), Banko et al. (2000), and Turner
and Charniak (2005), in that HMM Hedge does not require a corpus of paired stories and summaries.
HMM Hedge uses distinct language models of news stories and headlines, but does not require explicit
pairings of stories and summaries.
To transition our single-sentence summarization techniques to the problem of multi-document summarization, we must consider how to select candidates for inclusion in the final summary. A common
approach is to rank candidate sentences according to a set of features and iteratively build the summary, appropriately re-ranking the candidates at each step to avoid redundancy. MEAD (Radev et al.,
2004) scores source sentences according to a linear combination of features including centroid, position,
and first-sentence overlap. These scores are then refined to consider cross-sentence dependencies, such
as redundancy, chronological order, and source preferences. MCR differs in that multiple variants of
the same source sentences are available as candidates for inclusion in the final summary.
Minimization of redundancy is an important element of a multi-document summarization system.
Carbonell and Goldstein (1998) propose a technique called Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) for
ranking documents returned by an information retrieval system so that the front of the ranked list will
contain diversity as well as high relevance. Goldstein et al. (2000) extend MMR to multi-document
summarization. MCR borrows the ranking approach of MMR, but uses a different set of features. Like
MEAD, these approaches use feature weights that are optimized to maximize an automatic metric on
training data.
Several researchers have shown the importance of summarization in domains other than written
news (Muresan et al., 2001; Clarke and Lapata, 2006). Within the MCR framework, we discuss the
portability of Trimmer and HMM Hedge to a variety of different texts: written news, broadcast news
transcriptions, email threads, and text in foreign language.

4

3

Single-Sentence Compression

Our general approach to the generation of a summary from a single document is to produce a headline
by selecting words in order from the text of the story. Consider the following excerpt from a news story
and corresponding headline:
(1)

(i)

(ii)

After months of debate following the Sept. 11 terrorist hijackings, the Transportation
Department has decided that airline pilots will not be allowed to have guns in the
cockpits.
Pilots not allowed to have guns in cockpits.

The bold words in (1i) form a fluent and accurate headline, as shown in (1ii).
This basic approach has been realized in two ways. The first, Trimmer, uses a linguisticallymotivated algorithm to remove grammatical constituents from the lead sentence until a length threshold
is met. Topiary is a variant of Trimmer that combines fluent text from a compressed sentence with
topic terms to produce headlines. The second, HMM Hedge, employs a noisy-channel model to find
the most likely headline for a given story. The remainder of this section will present Trimmer, Topiary,
and HMM Hedge in more detail.

3.1

Trimmer

Our first approach to sentence compression involves iteratively removing grammatical constituents from
the parse tree of a sentence using linguistically-motivated rules until a length threshold has been met.
When applied to the lead sentence, or first non-trivial sentence of a story, our algorithm generates a
very short summary, or headline. This idea is implemented in our Trimmer system, which can leverage
the output of any constituency parser that uses the Penn Treebank conventions. At present we use
Charniak’s parser (Charniak, 2000).
The insights that form the basis and justification for the Trimmer rules come from our previous
study, which compared the relative prevalence of certain constructions in human-written summaries
and lead sentences in stories. This study used 218 human-written summaries of 73 documents from
the TIPSTER corpus (Harman and Liberman, 1993) dated January 1, 1989. The 218 summaries and
the lead sentences of the 73 stories were parsed using the BBN SIFT parser (Miller et al., 2000). The
parser produced 957 noun phrases (NP nodes in the parse trees) and 315 clauses (S nodes in the parse
trees) for the 218 summaries. For the 73 lead sentences, the parser produced 817 noun phrases and
316 clauses.
At each level (sentence, clause, and noun phrase), different types of linguistic phenomena were
counted.
• At the sentence level, the numbers of preposed adjuncts, conjoined clauses, and conjoined verb
phrases were counted. Children of the root S node that occur to the left of the first NP are
considered to be preposed adjuncts. The bracketed phase in “[According to police] the crime rate
has gone down” is a prototypical example of a preposed adjunct.
• At the clause level, temporal expressions, trailing SBAR nodes, and trailing PP nodes were
counted. Trailing constituents are those not designated as an argument of a verb phrase.
• At both the sentence and clause levels, conjoined S nodes and conjoined VP nodes were counted.
• At the NP level, determiners and relative clauses were counted.
The counts and prevalence of the phenomena in the human-generated headlines and lead sentences
are shown in Table 1. The results of this analysis illuminated the opportunities for trimming constituents and guided the development of our Trimmer rules, detailed below.
5

Level
Sentence

Clause

Noun Phrase

Phenomenon
preposed adjuncts
conjoined S
conjoined VP
temporal expression
trailing PP
trailing SBAR
relative clause
determiner

Summary
0/218
0%
1/218
0.5%
7/218
3%
5/315
1.5%
165/315 52%
24/315
8%
3/957
0.3%
31/957
3%

Lead Sentence
2/73
2.7%
3/73
4%
20/73
27%
77/316
24%
184/316 58%
49/316
16%
29/817
3.5%
205/817 25%

Table 1: Counts and prevalence of phenomena found in summaries and lead sentences.
3.1.1

Trimmer Algorithm

Trimmer applies syntactic compression rules to a parse tree according the following algorithm:
1. Remove temporal expressions
2. Select Root S node
3. Remove preposed adjuncts
4. Remove some determiners
5. Remove conjunctions
6. Remove modal verbs
7. Remove complementizer that
8. Apply the XP over XP rule
9. Remove PPs that do not contain named entities
10. Remove all PPs under SBARs
11. Remove SBARSs
12. Backtrack to state before Step 9
13. Remove SBARs
14. Remove PPs that do not contain named entities
15. Remove all PPs
Steps 1 and 4 of the algorithm remove low-content units from the parse tree.
Temporal expressions—although certainly not content-free—are not usually vital for summarizing
the content of an article. Since the goal is to provide an informative headline, the identification and
elimination of temporal expressions (Step 1) allow other more important details to remain in the lengthconstrained headline. The use of BBN’s IdentiFinderTM (Bikel et al., 1999) for removal of temporal
expressions is described in Section 3.1.2.
The determiner rule (Step 4) removes leaf nodes that are assigned the part-of-speech tag DT and
have the surface form the, a, or an. The intuition for this rule is that the information carried by
6

articles is expendable in summaries, even though this makes the summaries ungrammatical for general
English. Omitting articles is one of the most salient features of newspaper headlines. Sentences (2)
and (3), taken from the New York Times website on September 27, 2006, illustrate this phenomenon.
The italicized articles did not occur in the actual newspaper headlines.
(2)

The Gotti Case Ends With a Mistrial for the Third Time in a Year

(3)

A Texas Case Involving Marital Counseling Is the Latest to Test the Line Between Church and
State

Step 2 identifies nodes in the parse tree of a sentence that could serve as the root of a compression
for the sentence. Such nodes will be referred to as Root S nodes. A node in a tree is a Root S node if it
is labeled S in the parse tree and has children labeled NP and VP, in that order. The human-generated
headlines we studied always conform to this rule. It has been adopted as a constraint in the Trimmer
algorithm that the lowest leftmost Root S node is taken to be the root node of the headline. An
example of this rule application is shown in (4). The boldfaced material in the parse is retained and
the italicized material is eliminated.
(4)

(i)

Input: Rebels agreed to talks with government officials, international observers said Tuesday.

(ii)

Parse: [S [S [NP Rebels][VP agreed to talks with government officials]], international observers said Tuesday.]

(iii) Output: Rebels agreed to talks with government officials.

When the parser produces a usable parse tree, this rule selects a valid starting point for compression.
However, the parser sometimes produces incorrect output, as in the cases below (from DUC-2003):
(5)

(i)

Parse: [S[SBAR What started as a local controversy][VP has evolved into an
international scandal.]]

(ii)

Parse: [NP[NP Bangladesh][CC and][NP[NP India][VP signed a water sharing
accord.]]]

In (5i), an S exists, but it does not conform to the requirements of the Root S rule because it does
not have as children an NP followed by a VP. The problem is resolved by selecting the lowest leftmost
S, ignoring the constraints on the children. In (5ii), no S is present in the parse. This problem is
resolved by selecting the root of the entire parse tree as the root of the headline. These parsing errors
occur infrequently—only 6% of the sentences in the DUC-2003 evaluation data exhibit these problems,
based on parses generated by the BBN SIFT parser.
The motivation for removing preposed adjuncts (Step 3) is that all of the human-generated headlines
omit what we refer to as the preamble of the sentence. Preposed adjuncts are constituents that precede
the first NP (the subject) under the Root S chosen in Step 2; the preamble of a sentence consists of its
preposed adjuncts. The impact of preposed adjunct removal can be seen in example (6).
(6)

(i)

Input: According to a now finalized blueprint described by U.S. officials and other sources,
the Bush administration plans to take complete, unilateral control of a post-Saddam Hussein
Iraq.

(ii)

Parse: [S[PP According to a now finalized blueprint described by U.S. officials and other
sources], [Det the] Bush administration plans to take complete, unilateral control
of[Det a] post-Saddam Hussein Iraq.]

7

(iii) Output: Bush administration plans to take complete unilateral control of post-Saddam
Hussein Iraq.
The remaining steps of the algorithm remove linguistically peripheral material through successive
deletions of constituents until the sentence is shorter than a length threshold. Each stage of the
algorithm corresponds to the application of one of the rules. Trimmer first finds the pool of nodes in
the parse to which a rule can be applied. The rule is then iteratively applied to the deepest, rightmost
remaining node in the pool until the length threshold is reached or the pool is exhausted. After a rule
has been applied at all possible nodes in the parse tree, the algorithm moves to the next step.
In the case of a conjunction with two children (Step 5), one of the children will be removed. If the
conjunction is and , the second child is removed. If the conjunction is but, the first child is removed.
This rule is illustrated by the following examples, where the italicized text is trimmed.
(7)

When Sotheby’s sold a Harry S Truman signature that turned out to be a reproduction, the
prestigious auction house apologized and bought it back .

(8)

President Clinton expressed sympathy after a car-bomb explosion in a Jerusalem market wounded
24 people but said the attack should not derail the recent land-for-security deal between Israel
and the Palestinians.

The modal verb rule (Step 6) applies to verb phrases in which the head is a modal verb and the
head of the child verb phrase is a form of have or be. In such cases, the modal and auxiliary verbs
are removed. Sentences (9) and (10) show examples of this rule application. Note that although in
Sentence (10) the omission of trimmed material changes the meaning, given a tight space constraint,
the loss of the modality is preferable to the loss of other content information.
(9)

People’s palms and fingerprints may be used to diagnose schizophrenia.

(10) Agents may have fired potentially flammable tear gas cannisters.
The complementizer rule (Step 7) removes the word that when it occurs as a complementizer.
Sentence (11) shows an example in which two complementizers can be removed.
(11) Hoffman stressed that study is only preliminary and can’t prove that treatment useful.
The XP-over-XP rule (Step 8) is a linguistic generalization that allows a single rule to cover two
different phenomena. XP in the name of the rule is a variable that can take two values: NP and VP.
In constructions of the form [XP [XP ...] ...], the other children of the higher XP are removed. Note
that the child XP must be the first child of the parent XP. When XP = NP the rule removes relative
clauses (as in Sentence (12)) and appositives (as in Sentence (13)).
(12) Schizophrenia patients whose medication couldn’t stop the imaginary voices in their heads gained
some relief.
(13) A team led by Dr. Linda Brzustowicz, assistant professor of neuroscience at Rutgers University’s
Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience in Newark, studied DNA of dozens of members
of 22 families.
The rules that remove prepositional phrases and subordinate clauses (Steps 9 through 15) are
sometimes prone to removing important content. Thus, these rules are applied last, only when there
are no other types of rules to apply. Moreover, these rules are applied with a backoff option to avoid

8

over-trimming the parse tree. First, the PP rule is applied (Steps 9 and 10),1 followed by the SBAR
rule (Step 11). If the desired sentence length has not been reached, the system reverts to the parse tree
as it was before any prepositional phrases were removed (Step 12) and applies the SBAR rule (Step
13). If the desired length still has not been reached, the PP rule is applied again (Steps 14 and 15).
The intuition behind this ordering is that, when removing constituents from a parse tree, it is preferable to remove smaller fragments before larger ones and prepositional phrases tend to be smaller than
subordinate clauses. Thus, Trimmer first attempts to achieve the desired length by removing smaller
constituents (PPs), but if this cannot be accomplished, the system restores the smaller constituents,
removes a larger constituent, and then resumes the deletion of the smaller constituents. To reduce the
risk of removing prepositional phrases that contain important information, BBN’s IdentiFinder is used
to distinguish PPs containing temporal expressions and named entities, as described next.
3.1.2

Use of BBN’s IdentiFinder in Trimmer

BBN’s IdentiFinder is used both for the elimination of temporal expressions and for conservative
deletion of PPs containing named entities. The elimination of temporal expressions (Step 1) is a twostep process: (a) use IdentiFinder to mark temporal expressions; and (b) remove [PP ... [NP [X] ...]
...] and [NP [X]] where X is tagged as part of a temporal expression. The following examples illustrate
the application of temporal expression removal rule:
(14) (i)
(ii)

Input: The State Department on Friday lifted the ban it had imposed on foreign fliers.
Parse: [S [NP[Det The] State Department [PP [IN on] [NP [NNP Friday]]] [VP lifted
[Det the] ban it had imposed on foreign fliers.]]
(iii) Output: State Department lifted ban it had imposed on foreign fliers.

(15) (i)

Input: An international relief agency announced Wednesday that it is withdrawing from
North Korea.
(ii) Parse: [S [NP [Det An] international relief agency][VP announced [NP [NNP Wednesday]] that it is withdrawing from North Korea.]]
(iii) Output: International relief agency announced that it is withdrawing from North Korea.

IdentiFinder is also used to ensure that prepositional phrases containing named entities are not
removed during the first round of PP removal (Step 9). However, prepositional phrases containing
named entities that are descendants of SBARs are removed before the parent SBAR is removed, since
we should remove a smaller constituent before removing a larger constituent that subsumes it. Sentence
(16) shows an example of a SBAR subsuming two PPs, one of which contains a named entity.
(16) The commercial fishing restrictions in Washington will not be lifted [SBAR unless the salmon
population increases [PP to a sustainable number] [PP in the Columbia River]].
If the PP rule were not sensitive to named entities, the PP in the Columbia River would be the
first prepositional phrase to be removed, because it is the lowest rightmost PP in the parse. However,
this PP provides an important piece of information: the location of the salmon population. The rule in
Step 9 will skip the last prepositional phrase and remove the penultimate PP to a sustainable number .
This concludes an overview of the Trimmer rules and our syntactic sentence compression algorithm.
Given a length limit, the system will produce a single compressed version of the target sentence.
Multiple compressions can be generated by setting the length limit to be very small and storing the state
of the sentence after each rule application as a compressed variant. In section 4, we will describe how
multiple compressed candidates generated by Trimmer are used as a component of a multi-document
summarization system.
1

The reason for breaking PP removal into two stages is discussed in Section 3.1.2.

9

3.2

Topiary

We have used the Trimmer approach to compression in another variant of single-sentence summarization
called Topiary. This system combines Trimmer with a topic discovery approach (described next) to
produce a fluent summary along with additional context.
The Trimmer algorithm is constrained to build a headline from a single sentence. However, it is
often the case that no single sentence contains all the important information in a story. Relevant
information can be spread over multiple sentences, linked by anaphora or ellipsis. In addition, the
choice of lead sentence may not be ideal and our trimming rules are imperfect.
On the other hand, approaches that construct headlines from lists of topic terms (Lewis, 1999;
Schwartz et al., 1997) also have limitations. For example, Unsupervised Topic Discovery (UTD)—
described below—rarely generates any topic terms that are verbs. Thus, topic lists are good at indicating the general subject but rarely give any direct indication of what events took place. Intuitively,
we need both fluent text to tell what happened and topic terms to provide context.
3.2.1

Topic Term Generation: UTD and OnTopic

OnTopic (Schwartz et al., 1997) uses an HMM to assign topics to a document; topic models are derived
from an annotated corpus. However, it is often difficult to acquire such data, especially for a new genre
or language. UTD (Sista et al., 2002) was developed to overcome this limitation: it takes as input a
large unannotated corpus and automatically creates a set of topic models with meaningful names.
The UTD algorithm has several stages. First, it analyzes the corpus to find multi-word sequences
that can be treated as single tokens. It does this using two methods. One method is a minimum
description length criterion that detects phrases that occur frequently relative to the individual words.
The second method uses BBN’s IdentiFinder to detect multi-word names. These names are added to
the text as additional tokens. They are also likely to be chosen as potential topic names. In the second
stage of UTD, we find those terms (both single-word and multi-word) with high tf.idf. Only those
topic names that occur as high-content terms in at least four different documents are kept. The third
stage trains topic models corresponding to these topic terms. The modified Expectation Maximization
procedure of BBN’s OnTopic system is used to determine which words in the documents often signify
these topic names. This produces topic models. Fourth, these topic models are used to find the most
likely topics for each document, which is equivalent to assigning the name of the topic model to the
document as a topic term. This often assigns topics to documents where the topic name does not occur
in the document text.
We found, in various experiments (Sista et al., 2002), that the topic names derived by this procedure
were usually meaningful and that the topic assignment was about as good as when the topics were
derived from a corpus that was annotated by people. We have also used this procedure on different
languages and shown the same behavior. Since UTD is unsupervised, it can run equally well on a new
language, as long as the documents can be divided into strings that approximate words.
The topic list in (17) was generated by UTD and OnTopic for a story about the FBI investigation
of the 1998 bombing of the U.S. embassy in Nairobi.
(17) BIN LADEN, EMBASSY, BOMBING, POLICE OFFICIALS, PRISON, HOUSE, FIRE, KABILA
Topiary uses UTD to generate topic terms for the collection of documents to be summarized and
uses OnTopic to assign the topic terms to the documents. The next section will describe how topic
terms and sentence compressions are combined to form Topiary summaries.

10

3.2.2

Topiary Algorithm

As each Trimmer rule is applied to a sentence, the resulting state of the sentence is stored as a
compressed variant of the source sentence. Topiary selects from the variants the longest one such
that there is room to prepend the highest scoring non-redundant topic term. Suppose the highest
scoring topic term is “terrorism” and the length threshold is 75 characters. To make room for the topic
“terrorism”, the length threshold is lowered by 10 characters: 9 characters for the topic and 1 character
as a separator. Thus, Topiary chooses the longest trimmed variant under 65 characters that does not
contain the word “terrorism”, If there is no such candidate, i.e., all the trimmed variants contain the
word terrorism, Topiary would consider the second highest scoring topic word, “bomb”. Topiary would
select the longest trimmed variant under 70 characters that does not contain the word “bomb”. After
Topiary has selected a trimmed variant and prepended a topic to it, it checks to see how much unused
space remains under the threshold. Additional topic words are added between the first topic word and
the compressed sentence until all space is exhausted.
This process results in a headline that contains one or more main topics about the story and a
short sentence that says what happened concerning them. The combination is often more concise than
a fully fluent sentence and compensates for the fact that the information content from the topic and
the compressed sentence do not occur together in any single sentence from the source text.
As examples, sentences (18) and (19) are the outputs of Trimmer and Topiary, respectively, for the
same story in which UTD selected the topic terms in (17).
(18) FBI agents this week began questioning relatives of the victims
(19) BIN LADEN, EMBASSY, BOMBING: FBI agents this week began questioning relatives
By combining topics and parse-and-trim compression, Topiary achieved the highest score on the
single-document summarization task (i.e., headline generation task) in DUC-2004 (Zajic et al., 2004).

3.3

HMM Hedge

Our second approach to sentence compression, implemented in HMM Hedge, treats the observed data
(the story) as the result of unobserved data (headlines) that have been distorted by transmission
through a noisy channel. The effect of the noisy channel is to add story words between the headline
words. The model is biased by parameters to make the resulting headlines more like Headlinese, the
observed language of newspaper headlines created by copy editors.
Formally, we consider a story S to be a sequence of N words. We want to find a headline H, a
subsequence of words from S, that maximizes the likelihood that H generated the story S, or:
argmaxH P (H|S)
It is difficult to directly estimate P (H|S), but this probability can be expressed in terms of other
probabilities that are easier to compute, using Bayes’ rule:
(H)
P (H|S) = P (S|H)P
P (S)

Since the goal is to maximize this expression over H, and P (S) is constant with respect to H, the
denominator of the above expression can be omitted. Thus we wish to find:
argmaxH P (S|H)P (H)
Let H be a headline consisting of words h1 , h2 , ..., hn . Let the special symbols start and end represent
the beginning and end of a headline, respectively. P (H) can be estimated using a bigram model of
Headlinese:
P (H) = P (h1 |start)P (h2 |h1 )...P (end|hn )
11

The bigram probabilities of the words in the headline language were computed from a corpus of
English headlines taken from 242,918 AP newswire stories in the TIPSTER corpus. The headlines
contain 2,848,194 words from a vocabulary of 88,627 distinct words.
Given a story S and a headline H, the action of the noisy channel is to form S by adding non-headline
words to H. Let G be the non-headline words added by the channel to the headline: g1 , g2 , ..., gm . For
the moment, we assume that the headline words are transmitted through the channel with probability
1. We estimate P (S|H), the probability that the channel added non-headline words G to headline H
to form story S. This is accomplished using a unigram model of newspaper stories that we will refer
to as the general language, in contrast to the headline language. Let Pgl (g) be the probability of
non-headline word g in the general language and Pch (h) = 1 be the probability that headline word h
is transmitted through the channel as story word h.
P (S|H) = Pgl (g1 )Pgl (g2 )...Pgl (gm )Pch (h1 )Pch (h2 )...Pch (hn )
= Pgl (g1 )Pgl (g2 )...Pgl (gm )
The unigram probabilities of the words in the general language were computed from 242,918 English
AP news stories in the TIPSTER corpus. The stories contain 135,150,288 words from a vocabulary of
428,633 distinct words.
The process by which the noisy channel generates a story from a headline can be represented by a
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) (Baum, 1972). An HMM is a weighted finite-state automaton in which
each state probabilistically emits a string. The simplest HMM for generating headlines consists of two
states: an H state that emits words that occur in the headline and a G state that emits all the other
words in the story.
Since we use a bigram model of headlines, each state that emits headline words must “remember”
the previously emitted headline word. If we did not constrain headline words to actually occur in the
story, we would need an H state for each word in the headline vocabulary. However, because headline
words are chosen from the story words, it is sufficient to have an H state for each story word. For any
story, the HMM consists of a start state S, an end state E, an H state for each word in the story, a
corresponding G state for each H state, and a state Gstart that emits words that occur before the first
headline word in the story. An H state can emit only the word it represents. The corresponding G
state remembers which word was emitted by its H state and can emit any word in the story language.
A headline corresponds to a path through the HMM from S to E that emits all the words in the story
in the correct order. In practice the HMM is constructed with states for only the first N words of the
story, where N is a constant (60), or N is the number of words in the first sentence.2
In example (1i), given earlier, the H states will emit the words in bold (pilots, not, allowed, to,
have, guns, in, cockpits) and the G states will emit all the other words. The HMM will transition
between the H and G states as needed to generate the words of the story. In the current example,
the model will have states Start, Gstart , End, and 28 H states with 28 corresponding G states.3 The
headline given in example (1ii) corresponds to the following sequence of states: Start, Gstart 17 times,
Hpilots , Gpilots , Hnot , Gnot , Hallowed , Hto , Hhave , Hguns , Hin , Gin , Hcockpits , End. This path is not the
only one that could generate the story in (1i). Other possibilities are:
(20) (i)
(ii)

Transportation Department decided airline pilots not to have guns.
Months of the terrorist has to have cockpits.

2

Limiting consideration of headline words to the early part of the story is justified in Dorr et al. (2003a) where it
was shown that more than half of the headline words are chosen from the first sentence of the story. Other methods for
selecting the window of story words are possible and will be explored in future research.
3
The subscript of a G state indicates the H state it is associated with, not the story word it emits. In the example,
Gpilots emits story word will , Gnot emits story word be, and Gin emits story word the.

12

Although (20i) and (20ii) are possible headlines for (1i), the conditional probability of (20ii) given (1i)
will be lower than the conditional probability of (20i) given (1i).
The Viterbi algorithm (Viterbi, 1967) is used to select the most likely headline for a given story.
We use length constraints to find the most likely headlines consisting of W words, where W ranges
from 5 to 15. Multiple backpointers are used so that we can find the n most likely headlines at each
length.
HMM Hedge is enhanced by three additional decoding parameters to help the system choose outputs
that best mimic actual headlines: a position bias, a clump bias, and a gap bias. The incorporation
of these biases changes the score produced by the decoder from a probability to a relative desirability
score. The three parameters were motivated by analysis of system output and their values were set by
trial and error. A logical extension to this work would be to learn the best setting of these biases, e.g.,
through Expectation Maximization.
The position bias favors headlines that include words near the front of the story. This reflects our
observations of human-constructed headlines, in which headline words tend to appear near the front
of the story. The initial position bias p is a positive number less than one. The story word in the
nth position is assigned a position bias of log(pn ). When an H state emits a story word, the position
bias is added to the desirability score. Thus, words near the front of the story carry less of a position
bias than words farther along. Note that this generalization often does not hold in the case of human
interest and sports stories, which may start with a hook to get the reader’s attention, rather than a
topic sentence.
We also observed that human-constructed headlines tend to contain contiguous blocks of story
words. Example (1ii), given earlier, illustrates this with the string “allowed to have guns”. The
string bias is used to favor “clumpiness”. i.e., the tendency to generate headlines composed of clumps
of contiguous story words. The log of the clump bias is added to the desirability score with each
transition from an H state to its associated G state. With high clump biases, the system will favor
headlines consisting of fewer but larger clumps of contiguous story words.
The gap bias is used to disfavor headline “gappiness”, i.e., large gaps of non-headline words in the
story between clumps of headline words. Although humans are capable of constructing fluent headlines
by selecting widely spaced words, we observed that HMM Hedge was more likely to combine unrelated
material by doing this. At each transition from a G state to an H state, corresponding to the end
of a sequence of non-headline words in the story, a gap bias is applied that increases with the size of
the gap between the current headline and the last headline word to be emitted. This can also be seen
as a penalty for spending too much time in one G state. With high gap biases, the system will favor
headlines with few large gaps.
One characteristic difference between newspaper headline text and newspaper story text is that
headlines tend to be in present tense while story sentences tend to be in the past tense. Past tense
verbs occur more rarely in the headline language than in the general language. HMM Hedge mimics this
aspect of Headlinese by allowing morphological variation between headline verbs and the corresponding
story verbs. Morphological variation for verbs is achieved by creating an H state for each available
variant of a story verb. These H states still emit the story verb but they are labeled with the variant.
HMM Hedge can generate a headline in which proposes is the unobserved headline word that emits the
observed story word proposed , even though proposes does not occur in the story.
(21) (i)
(ii)

A group has proposed awarding $1 million in every general election to one randomly chosen
voter.
Group proposes awarding $1 million to randomly chosen voter.

Finally, we constrain each headline to contain at least one verb. That is to say, we ignore headlines
that do not contain at least one verb, no matter how desirable the decoding is.
13

Although we have described an application of HMM Hedge to blocks of story words without reference
to sentence boundaries, it is also possible to use HMM as a single sentence compressor by limiting the
block to the words in a single sentence.
Also, as we will see shortly, multiple alternative compressions of a sentence may be generated with
HMM Hedge. The Viterbi algorithm is capable of discovering n-best compressions of a window of
story words and can be constrained to consider only paths that include a specific number of H states,
corresponding to compressions that contain a specific number of words. We use HMM Hedge to generate
55 compressions for each sentence by computing the five best headlines at each length, from 5 to 15
words. In Section 4 we will describe how HMM Hedge is used as a component of a multi-document
summarization system.

4

Multi-Document Summarization

The sentence compression tools we developed for single-document summarization have been incorporated into our Multi-Candidate Reduction framework for multi-document summarization. MCR
produces a textual summary from a collection of relevant documents in three steps. First, sentences
are selected from the source documents for compression. The most important information occurs near
the front of the stories, so we select the first five sentences of each document for compression. Second,
multiple compressed versions of each sentence are produced using Trimmer or HMM Hedge to create a
pool of candidates for inclusion in the summary. Finally, a sentence selector constructs the summary
by iteratively choosing from the pool of candidates based on a linear combination of features until the
summary reaches a desired length.
At present, weights for the features are determined by manually optimizing on a set of training
data to maximize the Rouge-2 recall score (Lin and Hovy, 2003), using Rouge version 1.5.5. A
typical summarization task might call for the system to generate a 250-word summary from a couple
of dozen news stories. These summaries may be query-focused, in the sense that the summaries should
be responsive to a particular information need, or they may be generic, in that a broad overview of the
documents is desired.
Our sentence selector adopts certain aspects of Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) (Carbonell
and Goldstein, 1998), an approach that attempts to balance relevance and anti-redundancy. In MCR’s
selection module, the highest scoring sentence from the pool of eligible candidates is chosen for inclusion
in the summary. Features that contribute to a candidate’s score can be divided into two types: dynamic
and static. When a candidate is chosen, all other compressed variants of that sentence are eliminated.
After a candidate is added to the summary, the dynamic features are re-computed, and the candidates
are re-ranked. Candidates are added to the summary until the desired length is achieved. The ordering
of candidates in the summary is the same as the order in which they were selected for inclusion. The
final sentence of the summary is truncated if it causes the summary to exceed the length limit.

4.1

Static Features

Static features are calculated before sentence selection begins and do not change during the process of
summary construction:
• Position. The zero-based position of the sentence in the document.
• Sentence Relevance. The relevance score of the sentence to the query.
• Document Relevance. The relevance score of the document to the query.
• Sentence Centrality. The centrality score of the sentence to the topic cluster.
14

• Document Centrality. The centrality score of the document to the topic cluster.
• Scores from the Compression Modules:
– Trim rule application counts. For Trimmer-based MCR, the number of Trimmer rule instances applied to produce the candidate.
– Negative Log Desirability. For HMM-based MCR, the relative desirability score of the
candidate.
We use the Uniform Retrieval Architecture (URA), University of Maryland’s software infrastructure
for information retrieval tasks, to compute relevance and centrality scores for each compressed candidate. There are four such scores: the relevance score between a compressed sentence and the query,
the relevance score between the document containing the compressed sentence and the query, the centrality score between a compressed sentence and the topic cluster, and the centrality score between
the document containing the compressed sentence and the topic cluster. We define the topic cluster
to be the entire collection of documents relevant to this particular summarization task. Centrality is
a concept that quantifies how similar a piece of text is to all other texts that discuss the same general
topic. We assume that sentences having higher term overlap with the query and sources more “central”
to the topic cluster are preferred for inclusion in the final summary.
The relevance score between a compressed sentence and the query is an idf-weighted count of
overlapping terms (number of terms shared by the two text segments). Inverse document frequency
(idf), a commonly-used measure in the information retrieval literature, roughly captures term salience.
The idf of a term t is defined by log(N/ct ), where N is the total number of documents in a particular
corpus and ct is the number of documents containing term t; these statistics were calculated from one
year’s worth of LA Times articles. Weighting term overlap by inverse document frequency captures
the intuition that matching certain terms is more important than matching others.
Lucene, a freely-available off-the-shelf information retrieval system, is used to compute the three
other scores. The relevance score between the document containing the compressed sentence and
the query is computed using Lucene’s built-in similarity function. The centrality score between the
compressed sentence and the topic cluster is the mean of the similarity between the sentence and each
document comprising the cluster (once again, as computed by Lucene’s built-in similarity function).
The document-cluster centrality score is also computed in much the same way, by taking the mean
of the similarity of the particular document with every other document in the cluster. In order to
obtain an accurate distribution of term frequencies to facilitate the similarity calculation, we indexed
all relevant documents (i.e., the topic cluster) along with a comparable corpus (one year of the LA
Times)—this additional text essentially serves as a background model for non-relevant documents.
Some features are derived from the sentence compression modules used to generate candidates. For
Trimmer, the rule application count feature of a candidate is the number of rules that were applied to
a source sentence to produce the candidate. The rules are not presumed to be equally effective, so the
rule application counts are broken down by rule type. For HMM Hedge, we use the relative desirability
score calculated by the decoder, expressed as a negative log.
The features discussed in this section are assigned to the candidates before summary generation
begins and remain fixed throughout the process of summary sentence selection. The next section
discusses how candidate features are assigned new values as summary geneneration proceeds.

4.2

Dynamic Features

Dynamic features change during the process of sentence selection to reflect changes in the state of the
summary as sentences are added.4 The dynamic features are:
4
At present the dynamic features are properties of the candidates, calculated with respect to the current summary
state. There are no features directly relating to the amount of space left in the summary, so there is no mechanism that

15

• Redundancy. A measure of how similar the sentence is to the current summary.
• Sentence-from-doc. The number of sentences already selected from the sentence’s document.
The intuition behind our redundancy measure is that candidates containing words that occur much
more frequently in the current state of the summary than they do in general English are redundant
to the summary. We imagine that sentences in the summary are generated by the underlying word
distribution of the summary rather than the distribution of words in the general language. If a sentence
appears to have been generated by the summary rather than by the general language, we take it to
be redundant to the summary. Suppose we have a summary about earthquakes. The presence in a
candidate of words like earthquake, seismic, and Richter Scale, which have a high likelihood in the
summary, will make us think that the candidate is redundant to the summary.
To estimate the extent to which a candidate is more likely to have been generated by a summary
than by the general language, we consider the probabilities of the words in the candidate. We estimate
that the probability that a word w occurs in a candidate generated by the summary is
P (w) = λP (w|D) + (1 − λ)P (w|C)
where D is the summary, C is the general language corpus5 , λ is a parameter estimating the probability
that the word was generated by the summary and (1−λ) is the probability that the word was generated
by the general language. We have set λ = 0.3, as a general estimate of the portion of words in a text
that are specific to the text’s topic. We estimate the probabilities by counting the words6 in the current
summary and the general language corpus:
P (w|D) =

count of w in D
size of D

P (w|C) =

count of w in C
size of C

We take the probability of a sentence to be the product of the probabilities of its words, so we calculate
the probability that a sentence was generated by the summary, i.e. our redundancy metric, as:
Y
Redundancy(S) =
λP (s|D) + (1 − λ)P (s|C)
s∈S

For ease of computation, we actually use log probabilities:
X
log(λP (s|D) + (1 − λ)P (s|C))
s∈S

Redundancy is a dynamic feature because the word distribution of the current summary changes with
every iteration of the sentence selector.

4.3

Examples of System Output

We applied our MCR framework to test data from the DUC-2006 evaluation (Dang and Harman, 2006).
Given a topic description and a set of 25 documents related to the topic (drawn from AP newswire,
the New York Times, and the Xinhua News Agency English Service), the system’s task was to create
would affect the distribution of compressed candidates over the iterations of the sentence selector. This issue will be
addressed as future work in Section 7.
5
The documents in the set being summarized are used to estimate the general language model.
6
Actually, preprocessing for redundancy includes stopword removal and applying the Porter Stemmer (Porter, 1980).

16

Title: Native American Reservation System—pros and cons
Narrative Description: Discuss conditions on American Indian reservations or among Native
American communities. Include the benefits and drawbacks of the reservation system. Include
legal privileges and problems.
Figure 2: Topic D0601A from the DUC-2006 multi-document summarization task.
a 250-word summary that addressed the information need expressed in the topic. One of the topic
descriptions is shown in Figure 2. The 25 documents in the document set have an average size of 1170
words, so a 250-word summary represents a compression ratio of 0.86%.
Figures 3, 4 and 5 show examples of MCR output using Trimmer compression, HMM Hedge compression, or no compression. For readability, we use ◦ as a sentence delimiter; this is not part of the
actual system output. The sentences compressed by Trimmer mimic Headlinese by omitting determiners and auxiliary verbs. For example, the first sentence in Figure 3 is a compression of the following
source sentence:
Seeking to get a more accurate count of the country’s American Indian population, the
Census Bureau is turning to tribal leaders and residents on reservations to help overcome
long-standing feelings of wariness or anger toward the federal government.
Three determiners and a form of be have been removed from the source sentence in the compression
that appears in the summary. The removal of this material makes the sentence appear more like a
headline.
In comparison with Trimmer compressions, HMM compressions are generally less readable and
more likely to be misleading. Consider the final sentence in Figure 4.
(22) main purpose of reservation to pay American Indians by poverty proposals
This is a compression of the following source sentence:
(23) But the main purpose of the visit—the first to a reservation by a president since Franklin
Roosevelt—was simply to pay attention to American Indians, who are so raked by grinding
poverty that Clinton’s own advisers suggested he come up with special proposals geared specifically to the Indians’ plight.
Because HMM Hedge uses a bigram model of Headlines, it is unable to capture sentence-level
grammaticality. The same limitation makes it difficult to prevent misleading or incorrect compressions.
For example, the third sentence from the end of Figure 4 seems to say that a court legalized gambling
on Indian reservations:
(24) Supreme Court allows legalized gambling Indian reservations
However, it is a compression of the following source sentence:
(25) Only Monday, the California Supreme Court overturned a ballot measure that would have allowed
expansion of legalized gambling on Indian reservations.
Nevertheless, we can see from the examples that sentence compression allows a summary to include
more material from other sources. This increases the topic coverage of system output.
17

Seeking to get more accurate count of country’s American Indian population, Census Bureau turning to
tribal leaders and residents on reservations to help overcome long-standing feelings. ◦ American Indian
reservations would get infusion. ◦ Smith and thousands seeking help for substance abuse at American
Indian Community House, largest of handful of Native American cultural institutions. ◦ Clinton going
to Pine Ridge Reservation for visit with Oglala Sioux nation and to participate in conference on Native
American homeownership and economic development. ◦ Said Glen Revere, nutritionist with Indian Health
Services on 2.8 million-acre Wind River Reservation, about 100 miles east of Jackson, Wyo. “Then we
came up with idea for this community garden, and it been bigger than we ever expected.” ◦ Road leading
into Shinnecock Indian reservation is not welcoming one But main purpose of visit – first to reservation
by president since Franklin Roosevelt – was simply to pay attention to American Indians, who raked by
grinding poverty Clinton’s own advisers suggested he come up with special proposals geared specifically to
Indians’ plight. ◦ “This highlights what going on out there, since beginning of reservation system,” said
Sidney Harring, professor at City University of New York School of Law and expert on Indian crime and
criminal law. ◦ American Indians are victims. ◦ President Clinton turned attention to arguably poorest,
most forgotten ◦ U.S. citizens: American Indians. ◦ When American Indians began embracing gambling,
Hualapai tribe moved quickly to open casino. ◦ members of Northern Arapaho Tribe on Wind River
Reservation started seven-acre community garden with donated land, seeds and

Figure 3: MCR Summary for DUC-2006 Topic D0601A, using Trimmer for sentence compression.

David Rocchio deputy legal counsel to Vermont Gov. Howard Dean who has been involved in discussions
on Indian gambling through the National Governors Association said that the concern that governors have
is not with the benefit casinos bring to tribes ◦ Native Americans living on reservations that maintain 50
percent or more unemployment are exempt from the national five year family limit on welfare benefits ◦
Smith and thousands like her are seeking help for their substance abuse at the American Indian Community
House the largest of a handful of Native American cultural institutions in the New York area ◦ Juvenile
crime is one strand in the web of social problems facing urban and reservation Indian communities the
report said ◦ Soldierwolf’s family represents the problems that plague many of the 1.3 million American
Indians who live on reservations of whom 49 percent are unemployed ◦ Powless said the Onondaga people
want to work with the community outside the reservation to improve the economy of the region perhaps
creating tourism destinations that might include Indian culture or setting up a free trade zone at unused
manufacturing sites ◦ As Indian communities across the nation struggle with short funds and a long list
of problems they are watching the Navajo Nation’s legal battle with the federal government ◦ recognize
Indians not only Native Americans as Americans ◦ go on reservation system Harring Indian ◦ Supreme
Court allows legalized gambling Indian reservations ◦ American Indian reservations tribal colleges rise faster
than ◦ main purpose of reservation to pay American Indians by poverty proposals

Figure 4: MCR Summary for DUC-2006 Topic D0601A, using HMM Hedge for sentence compression

18

Seeking to get a more accurate count of the country’s American Indian population, the Census Bureau is
turning to tribal leaders and residents on reservations to help overcome long-standing feelings of wariness
or anger toward the federal government. ◦ American Indian reservations would get an infusion of $1.2
billion in federal money for education, health care and law enforcement under President Clinton’s proposed
2001 budget ◦ Smith and thousands like her are seeking help for their substance abuse at the American
Indian Community House, the largest of a handful of Native American cultural institutions in the New
York area. ◦ Clinton was going to the Pine Ridge Reservation for a visit with the Oglala Sioux nation
and to participate in a conference on Native American homeownership and economic development. ◦ said
Glen Revere, a nutritionist with the Indian Health Services on the 2.8 million-acre Wind River Reservation,
about 100 miles east of Jackson, Wyo. “Then we came up with the idea for this community garden, and
it’s been bigger than we ever expected in so many ways.” ◦ The road leading into the Shinnecock Indian
reservation is not a welcoming one ◦ But the main purpose of the visit – the first to a reservation by a
president since Franklin Roosevelt – was simply to pay attention to American Indians, who are so raked by
grinding poverty that Clinton’s own advisers suggested he come up with special proposals geared specifically
to the Indians’ plight. ◦ “This highlights what has been going on out there for 130 years,

Figure 5: MCR Summary for DUC-2006 Topic D0601A, with no sentence compression

19

R1 Recall

R1 Precision

R1 F

R2 Recall

R2 Precision

R2 F

HMM
Sentence
0.23552
(0.230140.24082)
0.21896
(0.213860.22384)
0.22496
(0.219830.22978)
0.06838
(0.065460.07155)
0.06287
(0.060170.06576)
0.06488
(0.062090.06785)

HMM
60 Block
0.21381
(0.209120.21827)
0.18882
(0.184440.19301)
0.19966
(0.195050.20391)
0.06133
(0.058480.06414)
0.05351
(0.050970.05588)
0.05686
(0.054200.05942)

Trimmer

Topiary

0.21014
(0.204360.21594)
0.20183
(0.196270.20722)
0.20179
(0.196120.20718)
0.06337
(0.060300.06677)
0.06230
(0.058870.06617)
0.06079
(0.057880.06401)

0.25143
(0.246320.25663)
0.23038
(0.225670.23522)
0.23848
(0.233730.24328)
0.06637
(0.063450.06958)
0.06024
(0.057470.06326)
0.06252
(0.059760.06561)

Table 2: Rouge scores and 95% confidence intervals for 624 documents from DUC-2003 test set.

5

System Evaluations

We tested four single-document summarization systems on the DUC-2003 Task 1 test set:
• HMM Hedge using the first sentence of each document (HMM Sentence)
• HMM Hedge using the first 60 words of each document (HMM 60 block)
• Trimmer
• Topiary
Task 1 from DUC-2003 was to construct generic 75-byte summaries for 624 documents drawn from AP
Newswire and the New York Times. The average size of the documents was 3,997 bytes, so a 75-byte
summary represents a compression ratio of 1.9%.
An automatic summarization evaluation tool, Rouge (Lin and Hovy, 2003), was used to evaluate
the results. The system parameters were optimized by hand to maximize the Rouge-1 recall on
a comparable training corpus, 500 AP Newswire and New York Times articles from the DUC-2004
single-document short summary test data.
The Rouge results are shown in Table 2. Results show that HMM Hedge 60 scored significantly
lower than most other systems and that Topiary scored higher than all other systems for all R1
measures. In addition, HMM Hedge Sentence scored significantly higher than Trimmer for the R1
measures.
We also evaluated Trimmer and HMM Hedge as components in our Multi-Candidate Reduction
framework, along with a baseline that uses the same sentence selector but does not use sentence
compression. All three systems considered the first five sentences of each document and used the
sentence selection algorithm presented in Section 4. The feature weights were manually optimized to
maximize Rouge-2 recall on a comparable training corpus, 1,593 Financial Times and Los Angeles
Times articles grouped into 50 topics from the DUC-2005 query-focused multi-document summarization
20

R1 Recall

R2 Recall

Trimmer

HMM Hedge

0.29391
(0.285600.30247)
0.06718
(0.063320.07111)

0.27311
(0.265540.28008)
0.06251
(0.058730.06620)

No
Compression
0.27576
(0.267720.28430)
0.06126
(0.057670.06519)

Table 3: Rouge scores and 95% confidence intervals for 50 DUC-2006 test topics, comparing three
MCR variants.

MCR Score
Higher
Not Different
Range
Lower

Rouge-2
0.0805
1
23
0.0678-0.0899
11

Rouge-SU4
0.1360
1
24
0.1238-0.1475
10

BE-HM
0.0413
0
27
0.0318-0.0508
8

Table 4: Official DUC-2006 Automatic Metrics for our MCR submission (System 32).

test data. The systems were used to generate query-focused, 250-word summaries using the DUC-2006
test data, described in Section 4.3.
The systems were evaluated using Rouge, configured to omit stopwords from the calculation.7
Results are shown in Table 3. MCR using Trimmer compressions scored significantly higher than
MCR using HMM Hedge compressions and the baseline for Rouge-1, but there was not a significant
difference among the three systems for Rouge-2.
Finally, the University of Maryland and BBN submitted a version of MCR to the official DUC2006 evaluation. This version used Trimmer as the source of sentence compressions. Results show
that use of sentence compression hurt the system on human evaluation of grammaticality. This is not
surprising, since Trimmer aims to produce compressions that are grammatical in Headlinese, rather
than standard English. Our MCR run scored significantly lower than 23 systems on NIST’s human
evaluation of grammaticality. However, the system did not score significantly lower than any other
system on NIST’s human evaluation of content responsiveness. A second NIST evaluation of content
responsiveness asked evaluators to take readability into consideration. In this evaluation, MCR scored
significantly lower than only two systems. The evaluators recognized that Trimmer compressions are
not grammatical in standard English; yet, the content coverage was not significantly different from the
best automatic systems and only two systems were found to be significantly more readable.
NIST computed three “official” automatic evaluation metrics for DUC-2006: Rouge-2, RougeSU4 and BE-HM. Table 4 shows the official scores of the submitted MCR system for these three
metrics, along with numbers of systems that scored significantly higher, significantly lower, or were not
significantly different from our MCR run. Also shown is the range of scores for the systems that were
not significantly different from MCR. These results show that the performance of our MCR run was
comparable to most other systems submitted to DUC-2006.
7
This is a change in the Rouge configuration from the official DUC-2006 evaluation. We note that the removal of
non-essential stopwords (typical of Headlinese) is an important component of Trimmer-based sentence compression. For
internal system comparisons, we configure Rouge in a way that will allow us to detect system differences relevant to our
research focus. For reporting of official Rouge results on submitted systems we use the community’s accepted Rouge
configurations.

21

The evaluation in Table 3 suggests that Trimmer sentence compression is preferable to HMM
Hedge sentence compression for generation of English summaries of collections of document in English.
However, HMM Hedge may prove to have value with noisier data, as we discuss in the next section.
Nevertheless, sentence compression appears to be a valuable component of our framework for multidocument summarization, thus validating the ideas behind Multi-Candidate Reduction.

6

Applications to Different Types of Texts

We have applied the MCR framework to summarizing different types of texts. In this section we briefly
touch on genre-specific issues that are the subject of ongoing work. Trimmer, Topiary, and HMM Hedge
were designed for summarization of written news. In this genre, the lead sentence is almost always
the first non-trivial sentence of the document. More sophisticated methods for finding lead sentences
did not outperform the baseline of simply selecting the first sentence for AP wire “hard” news stories.
However, some types of articles, such as sports stories, opinion pieces, and movie reviews often do
not have informative lead sentences and will require additional work in finding the best sentence for
compression.
MCR has also been applied to summarizing transcripts of broadcast news—another input form
where lead sentences are often not informative. The conventions of broadcast news introduce categories
of story-initial light content sentences, such as “I’m Dan Rather” or “We have an update on the story
we’ve been following”. These present challenges for the filtering stage of our MCR framework.
Such texts are additionally complicated by a range of problems not encountered in written news:
noise introduced by automatic speech recognizers or other faulty transcription, issues associated with
sentence boundary detection and story boundary detection. If word error rate is high, parser failures
can prevent Trimmer from producing useful output. In this context, HMM Hedge becomes more
attractive, since our language models are more resilient to noisy input.
We have performed an initial evaluation of Trimmer, Topiary, and a baseline consisting of the
first 75 characters of a document, on the task of creating 75-character headlines for broadcast news
transcriptions (Zajic, 2007). The corpus for this task consisted of 560 broadcast news stories from
ABC, CNN, NBC, Public Radio International, and Voice of America. We used Rouge-1 recall to
evaluate the summaries and found that both systems scored higher than the baseline and that Topiary
scored higher than Trimmer. However there were no significant differences among the systems.
Another application of our framework is the summarization of email threads—collections of emails
that share a common topic or were written as responses to each other. This task can essentially be
treated as a multi-document summarization problem, albeit email thread structure introduces some
constraints with respect to the ordering of summary sentences. Noisy data is inherent in this problem
and pre-processing to remove quoted text, attachments, and headers is crucial. We have found that
metadata, such as the name of the sender of each included extract help make email summaries easier
to read.
We performed an initial evaluation of HMM Hedge and Trimmer as the source of sentence compressions for an email thread summarization system based on the MCR framework (Zajic, 2007). The
corpus for this task consisted of 10 manually constructed email threads from the Enron Corpus (Klimt
and Yang, 2004). We used Rouge-1 and Rouge-2 recall with jackknifing to compare the automatic
systems and the human summarizers. We did not observe a significant difference between the two systems, but we found that the task of summarizing email threads was extremely difficult for the humans
(one summarizer scored significantly worse than the automatic systems). This application of MCR to
email thread summarization is an initial effort. The difficulty of the task for the humans suggests that
the community needs to develop a clearer understanding of what makes a good email thread summary
and to explore practical uses for them.

22

Finally, Trimmer and HMM Hedge have been applied to Hindi-English cross-language summarization. In this case, Trimmer was applied to the output of machine translation. We adapted HMM
Hedge to cross-lingual summarization by using the mechanism developed for morphological variation
to represent translation probabilities from Hindi story words to English headline words. For more
details, see Dorr et al. (2003a).

7

Future Work

Future work on text summarization under the Multi-Candidate Reduction framework will focus on the
three main components of the architecture: sentence filtering, sentence compression, and candidate
selection.
For single document summarization, the simple technique of selecting the first non-trivial sentence
of a document for compression remains the best approach. However, for human interest stories or sports
articles, this approach is less effective. In broadcast news transcripts, the first sentence often does not
contain important information. Currently, filtering for multi-document summarization also relies on
the assumption that important information tends to appear near the front of documents—the first five
sentences of each document are retained to generate compressed candidates. An interesting area of
future work is to explore other approaches to filtering, such as using query relevance and document
centrality, to move beyond the baseline of selecting the first n sentences. For HMM Hedge, these
methods can be used to determine the optimal blocks of text on which to apply the decoder.
Currently, Trimmer produces multiple compressions by applying rules in a fixed order; the state of
the compressed sentence after each rule application becomes a candidate. A richer pool of candidates
can be produced by modifying Trimmer rules to operate in order-independent combinations, rather
than a fixed sequence. We believe that the sentence selector can produce better summaries if it has
larger pools of candidates to choose from. Naturally, different sentence compressions are not the only
techniques for enriching the candidate pool—other possibilities include merging sentences and resolving
anaphora. Topiary will also be enhanced by using multiple combinations of compressions and topic
terms in the context of headline generation.
We also plan to enrich the candidate selector by taking into account more features of the current
summary state. Possibilities include sentence selector iteration count and remaining summary space, as
well as feature weights that change during the progress of summary generation. These extensions will
allow us to study the distribution of compressed and uncompressed sentences across sentence selector
iterations. System output can potentially be improved by finer-grained control of this distribution.
These features might also help avoid the current problem in which the final sentence is truncated due
to length restrictions (e.g., by selecting a final sentence of more appropriate length).
Proper setting of parameters is another important area for future work. Systematic optimization
of parameter values in HMM Hedge and the sentence selector could lead to significant improvements
in output quality. A logical extension to this work would be to learn the best parameter settings, e.g.,
through Expectation Maximization.
At present, MCR focuses exclusively on summary content selection and does not take sentence
ordering into consideration when constructing the summary. Naturally, high-quality summaries should
read fluently in addition to having relevant content. Recent work in this area that can be applied
to MCR includes includes Conroy et al. (2006), Barzilay et al. (2002), Okazaki et al. (2004), Lapata (2003), and Dorr and Gaasterland (this special issue 2007). Within the MCR architecture, fluency
considerations can be balanced with other important factors such as relevance and anti-redundancy
through appropriate feature weighting.

23

8

Conclusion

This work presents Multi-Candidate Reduction, a general architecture for multi-document summarization. The framework integrates successful single-document compression techniques that we have
previously developed. MCR is motivated by the insight that multiple candidate compressions of source
sentences should be made available to subsequent processing modules, which may have access to more
information for summary construction. This is implemented in a dynamic feature-based sentence selector that iteratively builds a summary from compressed variants. Evaluations show that sentence
compression plays an important role in multi-document summarization and that our MCR framework
is both flexible and extensible.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported, in part, under the GALE program of the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency, Contract No. HR0011-06-2-0001, the TIDES program of the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency, BBNT Contract No. 9500006806, and the University of Maryland Joint
Institute for Knowledge Discovery. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of DARPA. The first
author would like to thank Naomi for proofreading, support, and encouragement. The second author
would like to thank Steve, Carissa, and Ryan for their energy enablement. The third author would like
to thank Esther and Kiri for their kind support.

References
L. Bahl, F. Jelinek, and R. Mercer. 1983. A maximum likelihood approach to continuous speech
recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 5(2):179–190.
M. Banko, V. Mittal, and M. Witbrock. 2000. Headline generation based on statistical translation.
In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2000), pages 318–325, Hong Kong.
R. Barzilay, N. Elhadad, and K. McKeown. 2002. Inferring strategies for sentence ordering in multidocument news summarization. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 17:35–55.
L. Baum. 1972. An inequality and associated maximization technique in statistical estimation of
probabilistic functions of a Markov process. Inequalities, 3:1–8.
S. Bergler, R. Witte, M. Khalife, Z. Li, and F. Rudzicz. 2003. Using knowledge-poor coreference
resolution for text summarization. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Text Summarization
Workshop and Document Understanding Conference (DUC 2003), pages 85–92, Edmonton, Alberta.
D. Bikel, R. Schwartz, and R. Weischedel. 1999. An algorithm that learns what’s in a name. Machine
Learning, 34(1/3):211–231.
S. Blair-Goldensohn, D. Evans, V. Hatzivassiloglou, K. McKeown, A. Nenkova, R. Passonneau,
B. Schiffman, A. Schlaikjer, A. Siddharthan, and S. Siegelman. 2004. Columbia University
at DUC 2004. In Proceedings of the 2004 Document Understanding Conference (DUC 2004) at
HLT/NAACL 2004, pages 23–30, Boston, Massachusetts.

24

P. Brown, J. Cocke, S. Pietra, V. Pietra, F. Jelinek, J. Lafferty, R. Mercer, and P. Roossin. 1990. A
statistical approach to machine translation. Computational Linguistics, 16(2):79–85.
J. Carbonell and J. Goldstein. 1998. The use of MMR, diversity-based reranking for reordering
documents and producing summaries. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 1998), pages 335–336,
Melbourne, Australia.
Eugene Charniak. 2000. A Maximum-Entropy-Inspired Parser. In Proceedings of the First Meeting
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL 2000),
pages 132–139, Seattle, Washington.
J. Clarke and M. Lapata. 2006. Models for sentence compression: A comparison across domains,
training requirements and evaluation measures. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (COLING/ACL 2006), pages 377–384, Sydney, Australia.
J. Conroy, J. Schlesinger, and J. Goldstein. 2005. CLASSY query-based multi-document summarization. In Proceedings of the 2005 Document Understanding Conference (DUC-2005) at NLT/EMNLP
2005, Vancouver, Canada.
J. Conroy, J. Schlesinger, D. O’Leary, and J. Goldstein. 2006. Back to basics: CLASSY 2006. In
Proceedings of the 2006 Document Understanding Conference (DUC 2006) at HLT/NAACL 2006,
New York, New York.
D. Cutting, J. Pedersen, and P. Sibun. 1992. A practical part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of the
Third Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing, Trento, Italy.
Hoa Dang and Donna Harman. 2006. Proceedings of the 2006 Document Understanding Conference
(DUC 2006) at HLT/NAACL 2006.
B. Dorr and T. Gaasterland. this special issue, 2007. Exploiting aspectual features and connecting
words for summarization-inspired temporal-relation extraction. Information Processing and Management.
B. Dorr, D. Zajic, and R. Schwartz. 2003a. Cross-language headline generation for Hindi. ACM
Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing (TALIP), 2(3):270–289.
B. Dorr, D. Zajic, and R. Schwartz. 2003b. Hedge Trimmer: A parse-and-trim approach to headline
generation. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Text Summarization Workshop and Document
Understanding Conference (DUC 2003), pages 1–8, Edmonton, Alberta.
T. Dunning. 1994. Statistical identification of language. Technical Report MCCS 94-273, New Mexico
State University.
T. Euler. 2002. Tailoring text using topic words: Selection and compression. In Proceedings of 13th
International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications (DEXA 2002), pages 215–
222, Aix-en-Provence, France.
J. Goldstein, V. Mittal, J. Carbonell, and M. Kantrowitz. 2000. Multi-document summarization by
sentence extraction. In Proceedings of ANLP/NAACL 2000 Workshop on Automatic Summarization, pages 40–48.
D. Harman and M. Liberman. 1993. TIPSTER Complete. Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC),
Philadelphia.
25

H. Jing and K. McKeown. 2000. Cut and paste based text summarization. In Proceedings of the First
Meeting of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL
2000), pages 178–185, Seattle, Washington.
B. Klimt and Y. Yang. 2004. Introducing the Enron Corpus. In Proceedings of the First Conference
on Email and Anti-Spam (CEAS), Mountain View, California.
K. Knight and D. Marcu. 2000. Statistics-based summarization—step one: Sentence compression. In
Proceedings of the Seventeenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-2000), Austin,
Texas.
K. Knight and D. Marcu. 2002. Summarization beyond sentence extraction: A probabilistic approach
to sentence compression. Artificial Intelligence, 139(1):91–107.
M. Lapata. 2003. Probabilistic text structuring: Experiments with sentence ordering. In Proceedings
of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2004), pages
545–552, Barcelona, Spain.
David Dolan Lewis. 1999. An evaluation of phrasal and clustered representations on a text categorization task. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 1992), pages 37–50, Copenhagen, Denmark.
C.-Y. Lin and E. Hovy. 2003. Automatic evaluation of summaries using n-gram co-occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of the 2003 Human Language Technology Conference and the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics Annual Meeting (HLT/NAACL 2003),
pages 71–78, Edmonton, Alberta.
I. Mårdh. 1980. Headlinese: On the Grammar of English Front Page Headlines. Malmo.
E. Mays, F. Damerau, and R. Mercer. 1990. Context-based spelling correction. In Proceedings of IBM
Natural Language ITL, pages 517–522, Paris, France.
S. Miller, L. Ramshaw, H. Fox, and R. Weischedel. 2000. A novel use of statistical parsing to extract
information from text. In Proceedings of the First Meeting of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL 2000), pages 226–233, Seattle, Washington.
S. Muresan, E. Tzoukermann, and J. Klavans. 2001. Combining linguistic and machine learning
techniques for email. In Proceedings of the ACL/EACL 2001 Workshop on Computational Natural
Language Learning (ConLL), pages 290–297, Toulouse, France.
N. Okazaki, Y. Matsuo, and M. Ishizuka. 2004. Improving chronological sentence ordering by precedence relation. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING 2004), pages 750–756, Geneva, Switzerland.
M. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program, 14(3):130–137.
D. Radev, T. Allison, S. Blair-Goldensohn, J. Blitzer, A. Çelebi, S. Dimitrov, E. Drabek, A. Hakim,
W. Lam, D. Liu, J. Otterbacher, H. Qi, H. Saggion, S. Teufel, M. Topper, A. Winkel, and Z. Zhang.
2004. MEAD—a platform for multidocument multilingual text summarization. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004), Lisbon,
Portugal.

26

R. Schwartz, T. Imai, F. Jubala, L. Nguyen, and J. Makhoul. 1997. A maximum likelihood model
for topic classification of broadcast news. In Proceedings of the Fifth European Speech Communication Association Conference on Speech Communication and Technology (Eurospeech-97), Rhodes,
Greece.
S. Sista, R. Schwartz, T. Leek, and J. Makhoul. 2002. An algorithm for unsupervised topic discovery
from broadcast news stories. In Proceedings of the 2002 Human Language Technology Conference
(HLT), pages 99–103, San Diego, California.
J. Turner and E. Charniak. 2005. Supervised and unsupervised learning for sentence compression.
In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2005), pages 290–297, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
L. Vanderwende, H. Suzuki, and C. Brockett. 2006. Microsoft Research at DUC2006: Task-focused
summarization with sentence simplification and lexical expansion. In Proceedings of the 2006 Document Understanding Conference (DUC 2006) at HLT/NAACL 2006, New York, New York.
A. Viterbi. 1967. Error bounds for convolution codes and an asymptotically optimal decoding algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 13:260–269.
R. Wang, N. Stokes, W. Doran, E. Newman, J. Carthy, and J. Dunnion. 2005. Comparing Topiarystyle approaches to headline generation. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Advances in
Information Retrieval: 27th European Conference on IR Research (ECIR 2005), volume 3408,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.
D. Zajic, B. Dorr, and R. Schwartz. 2004. BBN/UMD at DUC-2004: Topiary. In Proceedings of
the 2004 Document Understanding Conference (DUC 2004) at NLT/NAACL 2004, pages 112–119,
Boston, Massachusetts.
D. Zajic, B. Dorr, J. Lin, and R. Schwartz. 2005a. UMD/BBN at MSE2005. In Proceedings of the
MSE2005 Track of the ACL 2005 Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for
MT and/or Summarization, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
D. Zajic, B. Dorr, R. Schwartz, C. Monz, and J. Lin. 2005b. A sentence-trimming approach to
multi-document summarization. In Proceedings of the 2005 Document Understanding Conference
(DUC-2005) at NLT/EMNLP 2005, pages 151–158, Vancouver, Canada.
D. Zajic. 2007. Multiple Alternative Sentence Compressions (MASC) as a Tool for Automatic Summarization Tasks. Ph.D. thesis, University of Maryland, College Park.
L. Zhou and E. Hovy. 2003. Headline summarization at ISI. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL
2003 Text Summarization Workshop and Document Understanding Conference (DUC 2003), pages
174–178, Edmonton, Alberta.

27

